# Graph Neural Networks for Accelerated Genome Assembly
## Abstract
Genome assembly is a cornerstone for computation biology, with an accurate reconstruction of an organism's genome being crucial to understanding its biology and evolution. This dissertation explores methods to improve the layout phase in the Overlap-Layout-Consensus genome assembly algorithm with the application of Graph Neural Networks. Conventional methods to clean and simplify overlap graphs utilize a collection of algorithms and heuristics that are insufficient to fully resolve all graph artifacts, ultimately relying on labor-intensive manual graph inspection. Graph Neural Networks have recently been shown to be a promising replacement to the traditional heuristic-oriented approach, helping improve assembly quality with increased contiguity and genome coverage. This project seeks to advance this neural assembly paradigm by exploring more advanced Graph Neural Network architectures, investigating graph-adaptive normalization, as well as automated feature extraction from raw sequencing data with the Mamba Selective State Space Model. Additionally, the advent of ultra-long sequencing technology offers new opportunities for resolving particularly complex genomic regions, such as long tandem repeats. This project integrates ultra-long reads with contemporary sequencing technology, yielding improved genome coverage, whilst maintaining assembly quality. Lastly, a proof of concept of an end-to-end neural assembly paradigm, where the neural network is not bounded to merely augmenting predefined assembly stages is also presented. This removes the constraints and biases imposed by the Overlap-Layout-Consensus framework.
